Hey everyone, we got our first look at
some Medieval 3 gameplay featuring a
siege, hearkening us back to the days of
Medieval 2, but even better. In this
case, it is a 360-degree city that makes
its way back, multi-layered. They showed
the different phases of the assault,
maneuvering to clamber up over the
walls. Some cool new features in that
now towers are fully simulated on the
inside, so you can have battles within
there, and using the destruction tool,
all of these towers can have their walls
uh brought down low and reveal what's
going on inside. Furthermore, once you
get inside the castle itself, all the
upgrades that you've done on your
campaign are present and available.
Level of city investment in the walls,
have you upgraded to moats, bastion
artillery, the likes. And then
furthermore, once you're actually in the
battle, there is a system of barricades
ala uh Total War: Attila, but new and
improved, made even better, made even
smarter with higher firing positions,
uh reduced surface area for assault. And
then finally, they cap it all off with
this massive assault upon the keep,
which now you can fully go inside and
bring the camera along with you for some
epic action. Most excitingly for me, CA
acknowledged that they had read my post
on unit cohesion and actually worked it
into the game itself, so great to see
that feedback being implemented. So,
we'll be breaking all this down in a
recap of not only the entire livestream
to squeeze out all the juice of this
juicy juicy lemonade of a presentation,
as well as some other stuff I've picked
up from the blog. So, that being said,
let's get into it.
I have gathered the livestream notes
here, which we'll be diving into. We'll
start off with a Medieval 3 recap blog,
which covers some additional details
that have come out between this current
and prior livestreams. And then we'll be
digging and separating out the different
chapters of the livestream that went
over an hour. So, this includes their
overall vision for battles, for sieges,
development tools, and then they showed
off some gameplay for wall assault,
street combat, and uh defenses. So,
let's get into it.
We'll start off here with the Medieval 3
recap blog. So, they talked a bit about
just reframing things, where's the game
at sort of overall. So, first off is
what do they mean by pre-production? So,
again, a lot of people were thinking
that, you know, when they say early
pre-production, it means that they have
notes on a board. Uh they're reinforcing
the idea that it is very much not true.
They do have a lot of stuff that's
working. It's very much placeholder, but
that is just intentional so that they
can focus on figuring out very
high-level conceptual
uh mechanics and working out how that
works. And you'll see that in the live
stream. So, uh
yes, they are in pre-production, but it
doesn't mean they're not making
substantive gains. Uh then they give us
a bit more details when it comes to the
campaign map. So, starting date and
timeline, it seems that prior uh to the
new year, they were saying they weren't
quite sure on the date. It seems like
now they are starting to settle on a
300-year uh time span from 1140 to 1440.
That gives you a big span of the Middle
Ages, but it does lop off a significant
amount of time from the early medieval
ages. Uh we might question why they
would do that, and I think that is
answered by Well, if you look at sort of
around 1140, 1130,
I think the reason why they're picking
this as the start date because this is
after the First Crusade. And so, you
have the formation of the Crusader
states, which tees you up for something
being set up in the world so that you
can play in that sort of sandbox. Versus
if you started earlier, prior to the
Crusades, the dynamic sort of sandbox
nature of the campaign would mean that
you probably couldn't get to uh the
Crusades. It's a It'd be up to the
player to do that versus the way they're
starting it now is they would already be
baked into the game and you had that uh
dynamic in play, which I think is smart.
Uh
they didn't mention this, but maybe in
the future what we could see would be
different start date setups or DLCs
where things are crafted around really
bringing to life different time periods
in history. I I would definitely enjoy
that or maybe even zoom ins.
Um and then they get into seasons,
turns, and time. So, across these 300
years, that's a long time frame. So,
they said that at a base level, the way
they're going to do this is one year is
one turn.
And within that, you're going to have
seasons that rotate every five turns.
So, every fifth year you'll get a
winter. That seems a little clunky, but
it is sort of one of the conceits that
they've had to made for allowing you to
cover this long time period. Uh but one
of the cool things they did say is that
they will allow players to actually
control the speed at which the game is
moving. Uh they didn't quite say to what
level, but presumably you could say one
turn is one season and you'll have four
seasons per turn. So, essentially four
turns per year, maybe even beyond that.
Uh and they also say that that will
trickle out to aging rules for leaders
and other things like that. So, I really
like the leaning in on customization for
your campaign and how it plays. We saw a
lot of that in uh Total War Pharaoh
where they innovated a lot on player
controls, end game states, and the like.
So, I really like that that'll be uh in
play for Medieval 3.
Then they talked high-level for
replayability and faction diversity. So,
they're coining this as horizontal
replayability, which is different
factions just having different nuances
to them. And then vertical
replayability, saying that within a
particular faction, you can just play it
different ways. And that is built out of
kind of systemic uh ways that you can
play the game. They have mentioned in
prior streams, for instance, when you
look at the campaign map here, each of
these settlement regions can develop
organically based on where you decide to
build. You're not preset on specific
city locations and preset building
trees. It's very much dynamic. You could
build very tall in a city or you could
scatter it out. The prosperity of a city
is a factor of trade, which then
influences what you can build, when you
can build it. So, that is them uh again
allowing for this vertical
replayability. So, overall, if they can
nail the two, it'll make for a lot of
replayability uh
broadly across the game.
Uh then they wanted to reflect on, "Hey,
we're listening to the community. We
heard a lot of feedback previously on
taxation, trade routes, specific goals,
technologies, all that stuff." So, uh
they just said, "Hey, we're here. We're
listening." And I was really psyched
about this. They specifically called out
my contribution to the game. So, they
said psychology of war, discipline, and
cohesion. So, cohesion was a mechanic
that I had pitched
a couple weeks back, posted on the
forums, got a community rep that
confirmed that it was before the team,
and it looks like they took a look at
it. So, for me, cohesion was essentially
the degree to which individuals acted as
a unit. I had given a big presentation
on sort of how that played out, and
essentially it was like this. You have
units that have magnetism between the
unit
soldiers and the unit leader, and as you
move, cohesion would go up, it would go
down, that would have implications for
the weight of a unit, its ability to
hold up in battle, and kind of I tied it
into a bunch of other things. And for
me, the main takeaway is cohesion is
just realism at the core of battles in
antiquity.
Uh
battles are made out of individual
soldiers, and you're really, you know,
honed in on to what degree do they act
as a force? And um
for me, I need cohesion if it's to make
any sense to be something that is
visually intuitive, and not something
that's hidden behind as a well, your
cohesion is low because the number says
20 instead of 50. No, for me, cohesion
needs to be something that's sort of
built into simulation. So, when CA
addressed this, I'll just read it uh
verbatim. They say, "We discuss
intentions for Medieval 3 to emphasize
the psychology of warfare with morale as
the core system and cohesion emerging
naturally from discipline, fatigue,
environment, and battlefield context
rather than as a separate bar." So, it
seems like they're just kind of speaking
the language that I had said. I'm very
keen to see uh essentially how this
plays out, but they are very much
seeming to mirror the language that I
had used. So, they say here, "Cohesion
affects how well units keep formation,
resist charges, and avoid being picked
apart, creating tactical opportunities
that ultimately feed into the primary
goal of breaking enemy morale." So, I
like that. That is very much uh in line
with what I was thinking, but again, the
implementation will be key. For me, when
I hear it's a something that kind of
falls out of the simulation, to me, that
kind of reads as something more like
this, where you have troops that kind of
messily run around each other like
fluids, which is good to an extent, but
I think
baked within that you still need the
aspect of cohesion, which is to me this
like magnetism to the leader, where yes,
units with soldiers with a unit might
want to flow out and kind of just
fluidly scatter themselves, but I think
it is key to have that magnetism that
draws them back to the unit leader,
because that would play into my idea of
using banner men musicians that cohesion
and have them draw back into the unit.
I'd be afraid if it's just, oh, it falls
out of the simulation that they become
very fluid, we lose all sense of
rigidity. So, I'm very keen to see how
that plays out.
So, now we can look at martial units and
regional retinues. So, the first thing
to note is that because we're spanning
300 years, armies do evolve and change.
They say early armies are going to be
region-based levies that are tied to
local lords, economies, and traditions,
versus late game forces are going to be
more professionalized standing armies. I
really like that, and I like in
particular that they're going to try and
not just make it a type of unit, for
instance, like we saw in Medieval 2,
early game you have access to
you know, peasant levies, but in this
case that levy is going to be grounded
on what local lord is raising them, what
is the economy like of that region, what
are the traditions that might inform the
arms that they bring to bear and all
that. So, I really like that. They go a
little bit deeper, where they say each
region fields its own customizable
retinue with distinct heraldry and
potential long-term traits, giving units
a strong sense of identity and grounding
them in the world. So, again, I could
imagine that you might have a unit from
a specific region of, you know, the
Frankish realms that maybe has a
preference for using axes, or history of
using the Francisca, or other weapons
like that. So, I really like that.
Then they go on and they talk about
recruitment. They say it will resemble
Three Kingdoms
in terms of mustering. Generals are
replaced by regional lords in this case,
and while full unit modularity isn't
planned, players will have flexible
retinue composition and narrative events
like emerging heroes.
That's really cool. It rings very much
true with what I was thinking, but you
know, I'm not going to claim credit.
This is a very general idea that almost
anyone looking at the period or a
military history simulator would come up
with. But that being said, I think what
I came up with in the concept is
probably along the lines of what they're
thinking. So in this case here, you
would click on a unit and for instance
here, it's generically speaking a heavy
sword infantry unit, but it is, you
know, the Knights of Toulouse. So you
would have the heraldry there, the name
there. And then in my mock-up, you would
be able to see the different officers
that are tagged to this unit. Members of
the retinue that you could change and
and play with. So I hope that CA does
draw inspiration for this in the sense
that I think each of these characters
should be clickable your unit, whether
or not they are a lord in the campaign,
even if they're just a, you know, a
local commander. I would still like to
click on them and learn more about them
and their personality. And then like CA
said, there could be an event that
promotes them up the chain. Furthermore,
when it comes to the actual officers in
your unit, again, I think this is
something where you should be able to
click on them, get information about
them, and customize them. And I think
there should be different classes of
these units that have different impacts
on how your troops perform. So I had
here sort of like officers and then had
musicians and bannermen. Musicians for
instance and bannermen were meant to
handle more of like cohesion and morale.
The officers up here might be better for
your discipline of your troops, how well
they fight, things like that. So
we'll see which way CA takes it, but I
would like to see something that's a bit
more detailed like I have here.
And then lastly in the blog post, they
cover modding in Medieval 3 and they are
trying to commit to modding support from
launch. Now, obviously we can expect
that's going to have a decent amount of
bugs and improvements, but they are
committing to having something available
at launch and supporting it throughout
the life of the project. And in terms of
what mod tools we can get, they're going
to say that we have access to the new
suite of mod tools including the War
Forge tool suite alongside the engine
advancements and tools that our
developers are using for production. So,
it seems like this is going to be a
great upgrade exposing this to the
community and I really hope that they
combine that with an ability to actually
make our own campaigns. You know,
obviously there'll have to be the
concerns about whether or not people
make Lord of the Rings mods and things
like that, but I really hope that it is
technically possible to do so in this
game to the same extent that we saw with
Medieval 2 that led that to be a
flourishing title.
So, that is going to be it for this
recap blog and then now we can get into
my recap of the roughly 1-hour
uh live stream.
So, this one is broken out into
different sections and yeah, let's go
into each one and I'll intersperse some
clips from the uh from the live stream
to give you a sense and feel of it.
Uh so, we'll start with their vision for
battles. So, they are commenting here,
well, what makes Total War special in
terms of battles and campaigns? They say
the two, it's the intersection of
high-level strategic campaigns and
low-level tactical battles, the merging
of the two that makes the sum of the
parts greater than the the the whole.
So, this is very key to just what Total
War is and they're looking to reinforce
that. So, they say here that campaigns
give you the stakes and the sort of
relevance and the backstory for a
particular combat and the battle itself
serves as a cinematic the climax of the
story that you're telling on the
campaign level and it's very important
to keep the two interlinked. Uh in terms
of how they want to deepen that
connection, they keep calling upon this
phrase window to the world which is a
pillar of their design and what that
means is they just want you to really
feel like you're engaged in the world.
So, one of the ways they're doing that
is that they are going to more strongly
link the terrain from your battle maps
to the campaign.
We've seen that in past Total Wars where
if you were to position your troops by a
mountain range or a forest or a field or
a bridge, that would actually be
relevant. And so, they're looking to
drive that home. Um yes, I hope that's
true. Uh I think it's really important
and I kind of got tired of the the
pre-made tile sets that we were seeing
in recent titles. Uh and then within the
environment itself, they're looking to
add more detail, more nuance to the
terrain. If if Pharaoh and recent titles
are anything to go off of, that means a
lot more well-sculpted areas with
terrain that's impactful in terms of
movement, like when it means mud or, you
know, slopes, things like that. And this
is just a piece of concept art that they
showed that is trying to drive home that
relevance. And to me, one of the cool
things that I do see here is you see
sort of the the the remnants of a camp.
So, maybe that means that we might even
have a reflection of the baggage train
in battles, and maybe that is some sort
of capture point that's relevant to
gameplay as well. So, yeah, I like where
their heads at. And then they showed us
here, again, this is a mock-up. This is
apparently concept art of a battle, but
to me it looks very close to what the
game looks like. But yeah, this this
kind of is the look and feel of it. A
couple of things to mention is that they
aim to have slower-paced battles, reduce
the tempo from what we've seen recently.
They did admit that historical players
do like that kind of slower, more
methodical thing, and they're looking to
find ways to make the phases of battle
more distinct: maneuver, skirmish, the
clash, and then the pursuit thereafter.
In terms of scale of all this, they're
looking to kind of stick to the the
tried-and-true 20-unit army stack. Um
and then when it comes to the map size,
they are still debating how large the
maps is it maps are it sounds to me like
they're not going to go the full size of
Medieval 2 where it's just insanely
large. Um but they said they want to
kind of still have that feel. So, they
want it to be large enough where that
sandbox feel from Medieval 2, but yet
small enough where you can have a
focused gameplay without a lot of dead
air. And um yeah, that's just kind of a
reflection of kind of the modernity of
how people expect games to play nowadays
is very much more fast-paced. So,
they're trying to find the balance
between the two.
Another thing that you can notice here
in this battle itself is that the UI is
quite minimal. Again, this is just a
mock-up, but for me this is great and it
shows the intent of where they're
heading. They want the battles and the
spectacle of it all to really be the
focus. So, gone away is this obnoxiously
large mini-map, gone away are the kind
of big unit cards and all the stats and
all the kind of like um
numbers on screen. And I hope that that
means that they're going to look more
into a lot more visually intuitive ways
to display the nature of your troops.
So, obviously here where unit size is
something that we would see. They're
trying to have banners that might
represent things that are inherent to
the game. Already I'm seeing an idea of
maybe the unit spacing and formations
could be a reflection of their overall
cohesion. And then again, take a look at
this in the back. Again, we're seeing
another teaser of some representation of
the baggage train in the camp. So, I
really hope that is a a feature of these
battles.
Other stuff they talked about in the
section in terms of their vision is they
do want to switch up a bit of how
battles play, which used to be grindy
and blobby. And you know, cohesion does
play a role in that, but something else
that they're playing with is this idea
of momentum. And this is meant to
capture the ebb and flow of combat. And
one of the things they said is that they
want to have this idea that small events
can ripple across the battle and change
your momentum. So, they gave an example
where in the same way that the routing
of a unit can lead to a chain routing
and a an overall collapse, they want
something to happen that's to the
inverse. Where instead of something
being a chain routing, there could be
like a chain inspiration that could
have, you know, happened because there
was a heroic action at some place in the
battle that rallies the troops. It could
be your general showing that he's still
alive, that he's fighting, that he's in
the front lines. They referenced the
idea, I think it was in Shogun 2, where
you could have your general dismount
from his horses showing that he's going
to be standing there and fighting with
your army. So, I like that idea. The
fact that they're trying to come up with
these more dynamic ways to change up the
momentum and really reflect the sort of
unpredictable nature of historical
battles.
Uh and then finally at the end here, I
was very proud of this. They had a
section that said, "What is the most
essential battle mechanic needed to
create an authentic representation of
land battles. Their answer was cohesion.
And so I was like, "Oh, cohesion, that's
a term I'm familiar with." And then they
went on and they directly said that sort
of my post about cohesion
uh actually seems to be changing the
game. So I'll read you their direct
quote here cuz I'm I'm quite proud of
it.
So they say here at 20 minutes, quote,
uh "We had a lot of internal discussions
around discipline. And then seeing the
discussion on the forums and Invicta's
proposal on cohesion, we're like, 'Oh
yeah, maybe we should look at it more
from a cohesion angle.' And we saw the
benefits and we sort of merged our
approach." So to me, that was really
awesome. I spent a lot of time thinking
about the implications of cohesion,
trying to make it both grounded in
history, and also thinking about the
gameplay implications, and trying to
make it something that could interact
with other mechanics that are already
there, and just trying to My intent was
it to be digestible, and it seems like
that was true, and I'm really happy to
hear that it seems to be something that
they were inspired by and are finding
ways to build it into the system. So
happy to have left my mark on Medieval
3. And the main thing to say here is
that they're always looking for other
people. It doesn't just have to be
someone with a platform like myself.
They do invite all people to go to the
forum and make their own post. So they
said they've seen things about ammo,
supplies, uh camp followers, things of
that nature. They say, "We read it all."
So a a call to action there.
Uh then they go over their vision for
sieges. In this case, they say they want
sieges to be the climax of the campaign
war/peace cycle. They recognize that
they in the past there were sort of too
many sieges and people got bored and
skipped over them and yeah, the auto
resolve was an
an issue. So they say, you know, now we
want sieges to be rather more rare and
not something that you have every turn,
but rather it's the culmination of a
long sort of series of battles that have
run up to the final uh siege that takes
place.
Um and then they also wanted to say that
a core part of these sieges that they
wanted again window to the world. They
want the campaign city improvements to
show up in the sieges. So walls, for
instance, are a function of well, have
you invested in walls on the campaign
map? To what extent have you built up
that wall building chain to get better
walls? To what extent have you invested
in improvements or perks to those walls
to include things like bastion artillery
or motes or other things that will
actually feature in the battle map.
Uh then they went on and they said that
this was a piece of art that they had
found that was kind of like a guiding
principle for how they wanted the look
and feel of the battles. Um so, this is
um the Siege of Rhodes and essentially
they they thought that it was evocative
they wanted. The idea that there's a lot
of carnage here when it comes to the
walls, that you have the emotion of the
soldiers. So, yeah, I mean, if they can
get anywhere close to these very
evocative ancient paintings of sieges,
then we're really, you know, we're
cooking here.
Uh another vision that they had for
sieges is that they committed to having
360° sieges being back. This is the idea
that as opposed to Warhammer 3 or the
you know, the Warhammer series
essentially, where you're always
attacking the front of the city, a slice
of the city, um they are now committing
to going back to how it was in the past,
which is
you can attack a city from all angles.
That's the 360° idea.
But they do admit that yes, while in
most cases you can go all the way around
a city, there are some restrictions. But
they want those restrictions to be not
arbitrary, but rather reflection of true
limitations. So, like campaign features.
The instance uh for instance, they said
like you know, is the your city abutted
against a river or an impassable feature
of terrain? Or is it a such a massive
city that really practically it only
makes sense for you to be exposed to,
you know, 1/4 of the city. And we do see
that historically when you're attacking
these major cities, you can only
approach it from one side and yet it
involves redeployment to attack it from
another. So, uh I really like that
direction. And next here we can get into
the development tools. So, I swear we're
getting closer to the gameplay, uh but
we're really showing the work that CA is
putting into this and they're very proud
to show a lot of the retooling they've
done to allow them to move faster, to
prototype faster. And for me, it was
really fascinating to see how this game
development works. So in this case, they
were showcasing the tools for authoring
settlements.
Uh lots of ways to customize your uh
your cities, and it all ties back to
the, you know, what you've done on the
campaign then trickles down into this
tool. So they wanted the interplay, and
they wanted it to be quick, dynamic, and
something that was scalable. So just
zooming in here, what does this mean? Uh
you'll notice that this is all within a
the same city map. So here is an early
level city with um you know, you can
toggle different settings here on the
the level of development, the walls, and
all that stuff. This is that same city
now that it's been expanded. And they
were emphasizing that this is what they
want to have happen in your campaign,
where if you return to the same city 200
years down the line, or maybe even after
a particular uh
intensive period of urbanization, you do
want to be able to recognize aspects of
your city, but then it dynamically to
grow out from there. So these are the
screenshots that I captured showing the
small city, the large one. And again,
this they also said that this was sort
of indicative of the scale of the battle
maps you can probably expect. Uh it is
notable that you can see here that these
cities are a little bit smaller than
some cities we've seen in the past, but
they said that this is more than made up
for by the fact that these cities are
more detailed, where each and every
small avenue is something that you can
traverse. The multiple levels of um
walls are things that you can fight
over. So although technically the square
footage of these cities are a little
smaller than other cities we've seen in
the past, the actual um
playable space within the cities is far
larger, and as as is the dynamic nature
of them. So I really like that. I tried
to do some zooming in that they were
saying that people were going to do
inevitably. Yes, I did this, and I
zoomed in, and I just tried to capture
sort of what were the little kind of
menu options. So you have stuff like
here where you can say, you know, what
battle type is this? So we're probably
siege. Uh and then there's drop-downs
for, you know, what is your castle wall
size? Said to have no walls, small
walls, medium, large. So you can control
the size of your city. and again, this
is a reflection of on the campaign map,
have you invested in this?
And then your wall level, what level of
wall, you know, how many walls do you
have?
How developed is your settlement level?
So, presumably you could have a
combination of these. You have a vast
settlement that's at level three, but
you've just built no walls, so the wall
would be level zero. So, you can have
all sorts of combinations here.
That's really great. And then in
addition to that, you might have a very
high settlement level, but then beyond
that, you can then refine in and dial in
the city level density. How many
structures are going to be in here? How
crowded are the avenues? So, take that
all together, and I think it's going to
be really rich. Layered on top of that,
obviously, is going to be the cosmetics
of what culture, what part of the world
are you in? And then sort of what are
the hero buildings that you can build on
the campaign, like a big cathedral and
things like that.
Then down here they showed an important
part of all this was revamping the wall
authoring tool. This allows them to make
very detailed walls, and we'll be seeing
that in the siege where walls are a lot
more interactable. And in this case,
they are saying, "Hey, with this new
tool, it's easy to make walls of any
shape and size, which lends itself to
this dynamism where now you're not going
to break it if you make a custom wall."
So, that's good to see. They're also
rethinking the width of walls to make it
more realistic. So, they're saying, for
instance, recently in Pharaoh, walls
were these giant platforms that were,
you know, 8 11 m thick so that you could
fit a whole unit versus now they're
actually trimming down walls and getting
them down to a more realistic 3.5 m.
That's awesome. It makes sense. That's
the way walls were done.
Maybe in the future there will be ways
to expand the size of your wall to host
more troops. But yeah, I like that.
They're just kind of leaning into the
realism and trying to find functional
ways and and build it into their tools
where they can make it work. Same thing
goes with smaller streets. And all this
has implication for reworked
pathfinding.
They're saying that they're more broadly
having to rework the AI, obviously, to
deal with the level of complexity that
they're baking in here. So, they went
into some nuance about that. And they
said pre-production right now is mostly
focused on honing in a lot of the
mechanics and sort of fleshing out,
well, what are the problems that the AI
has to solve? So, they're setting up the
environment that they have to master
before they just go mastering the AI
without having the environment sort of
in the rules of what is meant to be um
kind of what it what is the the the
environment within the AI within which
the AI is playing, which makes sense.
Yeah, don't put the cart before the
horse in this case. And they're saying
they're having a lot of iterations on
this, refining the AI slightly, seeing
how that plays out. Okay, maybe this is
working, not working, going back and
forth. So, just just good to get that
clarity from CA.
And then finally here we get into the
gameplay section. This is all very early
stage placeholder and they walk us
through these three sequences. The first
one is going to be a wall assault. So,
they say, "Hey, here's a playable
version of the siege." Uh, they showed
us the map itself. So, they said
placeholder UI, art, models, animations,
textures, you have it. It's all
placeholder. Um, but it's meant to
actually just, you know, allow them to
toy with ideas.
Uh, they're working here they said on
unit behavior, the pathfinding to and
from settlements, the sort of
squishiness and fluidity of the units.
Uh, I was excited here where it looks
like there's a little bit of my kind of
cohesion idea coming to play.
Um,
and then they want to see how how do
units interact with each other and the
environment. Uh, that's going to be
impacted by the upgrades made to the War
Forge engine, the idea that if a wall is
collapsed and becomes rubble, they want
the unit to actually be able to flow
over with it and interact with it
without freaking out.
Uh, we got a couple other things they're
playing with. One is going to be this
suppression mechanic. They showed
archers firing upon other archers at the
walls. Uh, in this case when range units
do take archer fire, they get reduced
accuracy and defensive capability. And
you would assume that the same type of
suppression would be uh, affecting foot
troops, mounted troops, and the like,
but have different kind of uh,
results from that. So, I like the idea
that they have suppression in there.
Uh, and then they did show ladders. How
do we climb upon the walls? Uh, no siege
engines, no sapping. They did mention
these offhand in the sense that yes,
they'll be there, but mechanically
they're just not in this test build. So,
right now they have ladders. They did
show big caveats that while in the video
it was showing pocket ladders in the
sense that they ladders appeared out of
nowhere. They said that was just the um,
a shortcut that they took to make it
easier to test. Later in the game
they're going to focus on the animation
and the rigging to have their characters
actually carry real ladders and they're
committing to having real ladders, but
the pocket ladders is just a shortcut to
to get through the testing phase. Um,
and they are actually considering the
idea that well, if ladders are mounted
to the walls, can they be pushed off?
Can they be destroyed? They very much
want to at any turn of this development
dial in the realism.
Uh,
talking about walls, again we said that
they were narrow. They are actually 100%
destructible, so no longer will there be
like um, parts of the wall that are
indestructible. That's because of the
way the walls are generated. No, we're
new, we're modern tech. All parts of the
wall can be destroyed. Uh, and troops
can fall off both while the wall is
being together and also when it's
destroyed, there'll be a collapse and
there'll be damage.
Then they showed off the towers. Uh,
towers I think are really cool and it's
emblematic of the upgrades overall to
the engine here. Uh, so they're really
leaning in hard to the simulation nature
of this. These towers are open
environments in which troops can flow.
Once they're inside, the troops
themselves will path find within the
structures. They'll go up dynamically
the different levels of the tower. So,
yes, troops go inside and they showed
the camera flying around to show that
there's actually combat taking place
inside. So, very much leaning in on the
simulation. I really like this. Um, and
yeah, they said towers are no longer
these sort of automated machine gun
things. If a tower is shooting, it's
because you actually have troops
deployed in there. They said that range
units can shoot out of them uh, and that
if melee units go in, they'll be able to
sort of pick up ambient bows and fire
from within the tower. So, I like this.
Again, very cool.
Um but they did say they're trying to
work out
how do you make it where it's kind of
visually intuitive that stuff is going
on within the tower. Um maybe there'll
be some sort of proximity that sheds the
walls of the tower so you can know
what's going what's going on inside.
Maybe it's going to be a debug view.
They're still working on that, but they
are committing to the fact that stuff is
going on in the tower. And they alluded
to the idea that if the tower gets
destroyed and let's say a wall
collapses, you would still be able to
see that fighting. So, I think that's
really cool and it ties back to that uh
illustration that was their inspiration
here. That's kind of what we're going on
here. The fighting is taking place
within the tower even though the side
wall has completely collapsed. So, I
really like that and you can see how
it's guiding them.
Uh next they move on to the street
combat gameplay. The big intent here was
to show how streets are much more
narrow. So, they said it goes down to 12
m as opposed to past titles which had
these large avenues. So, down to 12 m
means that there is a lot more um nuance
to how you want to move around your
city. Uh urban density is key uh and
they said here that obviously
this poses issues for pathfinding that
they're very much early on wanting to
resolve. So, they showed units moving
around, wrapping around the corners,
moving through small streets. Uh they
showed here when you do your deployment,
when you do the preview, it pre-clips
itself around the building versus in
kind of older Total War titles, it just
wouldn't allow you to place your unit
there. And so, they're yeah, they're
trying to build in a lot more of this
dynamism.
Uh another thing that I had thought
about was garrison buildings, you know,
it it looks like if they're leaning into
the simulation that maybe troops could
go inside and garrison buildings and
fight within buildings. Uh there was no
mention of that when it came to regular
buildings, uh only for walls, towers,
and castles, but we'll see if they
explore that. I could imagine that could
be a cool thing in the future where you
would have to go house to house clearing
out troops or potentially maybe just
your iconic units. What if there's like
the Cathedral of Notre Dame where troops
could actually come inside and brawl
within the church? It'd be very cool.
Uh and then later on they said that hey,
for all these sieges, again, we're open
to player feedback. Uh they want,
generally speaking, to avoid a sense of
slog and they want it to be closer to
Shogun 2
uh pacing where you had these different
layers and once you took a layer, it
really felt like you kind of had the
breathing room to rally yourself,
reform, and prep for the next stage of
the attack. Same thing from the
defender, you could fall back and really
have that sense of progression. So, that
that hearkens all the way back to sort
of the Medieval 2 era.
And then finally, we get the last little
scenario, which is going to be the
assault on the keep and the defenses
here. So, zooming in here, they did show
that yes,
uh there's going to be a layering of the
city. Part of that is going to be the
walls, but a big part of it is going to
be just the nature of the city layout
and having natural barriers and
fortifications. So, things like rivers,
choke points, bridges, and the like are
all going to be important. Uh
fortifications can be things that you
have upgraded for your, you know,
campaign level that show up here. Do you
have a moat? Do you have bastion
artillery? Do you have reinforced gate
defenses? Things like that. But then
they also said when you go into the
battle during like the setup phase, you
actually have control as a defender over
improvised fortifications. So, it's
described as an evolution of the Attila
barricade system. Uh and they said that
it is not going to be like Warhammer 3
where
uh you would invest in these barricades
live and that towers would pop up using
magic. They said no, this is very much a
pre-battle thing, but that you still
have control over where you place these.
Uh and this was all to reinforce the
idea that the defender has the advantage
here. They want the defender to be
empowered and that you should be able to
hold out, you know, one to two with a
one to two person ratio.
So, two to one odds as a defender, uh
you should be able to fight that off.
But again, it depends on the
fortifications. Uh as for the
fortifications, they zoomed in and
showed some placeholder examples here by
the keep. Obviously, this is this are
fixed stuff, but then down here on the
bottom, you can see the temporary
fortifications that have been set up.
So, it's again placeholder, but they're
showing that it's a mix of platforms
that really helps your range units have
better line of sight, more
effectiveness. And then in terms of your
ground troops, they would then be able
to sort of butt up against these crates
and other things that are put in place
here that would limit the ability of the
attackers to to press through. So, it
might blunt charges, it might slow them,
it may decrease their stats. And
presumably, it just lowers the surface
area available to push through this
killing field while range units in the
surrounding area snipe them and take
them out. And then the coolest thing for
me was that they showed off the final
storming of the keep as the last bastion
point. In the past in Medieval 2, you
could stand by the keep, but never go
inside versus now with their um
kind of commitment to simulations,
all of the inside of the keep is fair
game. They should said that you could
put your king at the very top tower, he
would be firing out versus uh you know,
and as he's up there, the rest of your
troops could be falling back taking
position within the keep. And they
really showed that live as troops were
storming up through the different
plazas, making their way through the
murder holes. They showed how you could
see the different levels, the sight
lines, all the while your troops are
going to be fighting hand-to-hand,
shooting arrows and all that. So, that
is going to be very epic and I hope that
in the if they dial this up in the
future and really figure out these sort
of close-quarters pathfinding and
animations, could make for some
absolutely cinematic uh and breathtaking
and memorable engagements in these
keeps.
Maybe even to the point that if they
open up the floor for modders, I could
definitely see um modders having a field
day with actually designing nice
interiors for these, maybe even making
mini games with defending the castle and
all sorts of cool stuff. So, this has a
lot of promise for the future.
Uh but that's it. So, this is going to
be my recap of this live stream. There's
going to be more to come from CA. I very
much approach their sort of open kimono
style um approach to development. We've
never seen this before. It gives me a
lot of
hype for the game knowing that it
they're not just selling us smoke and
mirrors. They're engaging before the
marketing team is engaging and selling
us,
you know, a lot of hopes and dreams.
We're actually seeing it being
developed. And even more than that is,
you know, the concept that when we do
give them feedback, like when I gave
them the feedback on cohesion and
presented it, they actually took it and
tried, discussed it and said, "Oh yeah,
that makes sense. Let's merge it with
our own approach." So, you know, all
this to me is a step in the right
direction and it's already bearing
fruit. So, let me know what you think in
the comment section below and head on
over to the forums to leave your own
ideas and feedback. I'll see you in the
next one. Peace out.